Better lazy schema references (#24030)
microsoft/FluidFramework: .changeset/new-cooks-remain.md

---
"fluid-framework": minor
"@fluidframework/tree": minor
---
---
"section": tree
---

Rules regarding how and when lazy schema references are resolved have been clarified

A lazy schema reference is a [LazyItem](https://fluidframework.com/docs/api/fluid-framework/lazyitem-typealias) referencing a [TreeNodeSchema](https://fluidframework.com/docs/api/fluid-framework/treenodeschema-typealias).

> They typically look like `() => MySchema` and are used when a forward reference from one schema to another is required (including but not limited to recursive and co-recursive schema).

Reviewer: We definitely need to be specific about when the references are resolved. When does the final composition take place?

> They typically look like `() => MySchema` and are used when a forward reference from one schema to another is required (including but not limited to recursive and co-recursive schema).

Author: > Not sure I understand what "a forward reference" means.

"forward reference" is a bit of standard programming/computing jargon: https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/forward_reference and also https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forward_declaration#Forward_reference.

> "Reference that is evaluated at runtime(ish)"

All schema references are evaluated at runtime (including the regular (backward) references: if they weren't this mechanism wouldn't be necessary.

> "Delayed reference"

We already are using a descriptive term specific to our codebase here "lazy schema references": I think defining that in terms of more phrases we have to define up isn't particularly helpful compared to noting that this is an implementation of a standard (somewhat) well known concept people can look up if needed (forward reference).

----

Since forward reference as a term is apparently less well known that I expected, I have added a link. Does this add sufficient clarity?

> They typically look like `() => MySchema` and are used when a forward reference from one schema to another is required (including but not limited to recursive and co-recursive schema).

Reviewer: Where is the documentation for this in particular? I must have missed it.

> They typically look like `() => MySchema` and are used when a forward reference from one schema to another is required (including but not limited to recursive and co-recursive schema).

Author: TreeViewConfiguration's constructor in packages/dds/tree/src/simple-tree/api/tree.ts

[TreeViewConfiguration](https://fluidframework.com/docs/api/fluid-framework/treeviewconfiguration-class#_constructor_-constructor) now documents its significance with respect to lazy schema references.
Additionally some implicit assumptions like no modifications of [AllowedTypes](https://fluidframework.com/docs/api/fluid-framework/allowedtypes-typealias)

> after resolving of lazy schema references have been enforced (such modifications would previous cause undefined behavior in the future, and now error is thrown when trying to modify them).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
after resolving of lazy schema references have been enforced (such modifications would previously cause undefined behavior in the future, and now an error is thrown when trying to modify them).
```

`evaluateLazySchema` has been added as an `@alpha` API that is now consistently used by all internal code when evaluating lazy schema references.
This ensures consistent behavior and error reporting, but also adds caching.

> Therefor it is now supported for applications to have lazy schema references which compute the schema when invoked,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore it is now supported for applications to have lazy schema references which compute the schema when invoked,
```
